Order_Cancellations_Write_Up.txt

For retail firms involved in e-commerce, how can we identify and reduce the number of online order likely to cancel? 
 
The data set used for this project included orders from US customers. It ranges full year 2015, 2016, and includes orders for the first 9 month of 2017. The data itself was one row
per order and included details about the order, buyer, and seller; it was clean for the most part and had only NA's for zip code, an attribute not used for this analysis.

At the beginning of the project, I intended on answering the question of 'How can this company make more profit?'. However, the attributes description file for this dataset did not
indicate whether the currencies displayed were in USD or some other currency. Further investigations showed that although I was able to limit a sub set of the data to include only 
US buyers, I could not confirm currencies were in USD: I picked some items from the data set and compared their recorded final price with an equivalent price from a similar product 
online and found these prices outside a reasonable price range. After failing to receive an email confirmation from the publisher of the dataset, I decided to alter the business
question to be independent of any currencies. Because the data set included attributes indicating geographical locations and timestamps of when the orders where placed, I first 
mapped out the data by each one of these attributes separately. The geographic display of the data showed showed orders concentrated most in major metropolitan cities, with less 
frequent clusters toward the middle US. Although one would expect a uniform placement of orders throughout the US given that we are dealing with e-commerce, it is important to 
remember that our data was limited to one retailer, in the business of selling apparel, electronics, and sports items. We should expect a much more fuller map of orders if, for
example, the data set was for Amazon or a much bigger company. The data showed no time-dependent patterns at the hour, month, quarter, or yearly levels, except for day of week. 
Graphing orders by day of week for each of year, showed a recurrent pattern from Monday through Sunday. Because of the various items sold online, I broke each item sold into three
major categories, electronics, sports, and apparel, this greatly simplified the attribute for item-type when reading the model. To simplify the geographical variable in our model,
I condensed all the geo-locations into 9 major areas: pacific, west-south-central, west-north-central, south-atlantic, mountain, new-england, middle-atlantic, east-south-central,
and east-north-central. Bucketing the geographical coordinates into the 9 major regions allows for a more digestible interpretation of the model while retaining the uniqueness and
behavior of a geographical region. Although each of these attributes were key in identifying features that could make an order more likely to cancel, it was necessary to include
interactions between some of these variables that could further explain the nature of what makes orders more likely to cancel. For example, after finding that more orders were
placed toward the start of the week and again as the weekend approached, I was able to introduce into the model an attribute that helped explain the psychological behavior behind
a customer's desire to order more items as the weekend approached than at the start.

I decided to use logistic classification for this dataset for two major reasons. First, the interpretation of the model allows the business to identify which attribute of an order
leads to the highest likely-hood of the orders being cancelled. For example, after finding that orders of 3 items are more likely to be cancelled than those of 1 item, the retailer
can thus proceed in further investigating what is it about 3-item orders that increase its chances of being cancelled. Questions such as: is our 3-item product bundle combination
deal not working as we expected? Is there a glitch in our online platform when a customer places a 3-item order? The interpretation of the logistic classifying model gives us 
further insight into how each attribute contributes to the prediction of a cancelled order, this is above and beyond the output produced by the model. Although we do have other
classification models that could've been used, such as Support Vector Machines and Regression Trees, they do not provide the unique insight the logistic regression model provides.
For example, to use Regression Trees as our predicting model would have us making definitive decisions at each step, making each attribute of an order seem dependent on the 
previous attribute when reading down the prediction of an order in the decision tree. Alternatively, the logistic classification model attaches the likelihood of the cancellation
of an order just on the attribute alone. 

As mentioned earlier, the logistic classification model provides the retailer information about what makes an order more likely to cancel, in addition to the actual prediction 
of having that order cancel. This modeling approach provides a unique perspective on an order's characteristics, such as finding that 3-item orders are more likely to cancel 
than 1-item orders. This findings allows the company to identify possible areas of improvement and implement changes that could later decrease the chances of orders being
cancelled. I also found that electronic orders placed in the north central region just over 25% more likely to cancel when compared to apparel order placed by pacific-region 
customers. This would prove useful to the company because it opens the discussion of replicating the better business strategy from the pacific over to the east north central
region. 

The retailer would feed the model data every 2-3 hours, receive the prediction within minutes, identify those order at risk of being cancelled, and kick-start a promotional 
offer to the customers of those orders before implementing the shipping of the product. This effectively incentivises the customer to not cancel, and thus safeguards the retailer
from costs associated with cancelled orders midway through the shipping chain, let alone having to introduce new costs in the shipping & handling price tag that would most likely
deter customers from placing an order to begin with. 

After working the data, there are additional pieces of information that could be used to make a much more profound analysis on the model implemented. For example, if the data
had more information about the cancellation, it would have allowed for more interaction effects in the model that could capture more reason why the order was cancelled 
initially. Knowing whether an order was cancelled immediately after it was placed compared to hours after being placed provides us a new dimension of insight about the customer: 
Was the order placed accidentally when cancelled right away? Did the customer find the same product from an alternative retailer at a much cheaper price? Answers to these
questions would be addressed in our model had we additional cancellation data.

